Subject: Roden Crater (James Turrell): Presentation Video (https://vimeo.com/67926427)

This video has several elements in it that intrigue me. One of these is the idea of manipulating the natural world on a large scale. An interesting question to me is whether doing this is ethical. I care deeply about archival and preservation of history, so changing the natural landscape, especially a distinctive landmark feature of it, always makes me wary. In this case, the artist seems to be doing so very tastefully and considerately, but there is no guarantee of this with any given project, and what is ethical or acceptable is invariably subjective. Consequently, I feel ambivalent about fully endorsing projects of this type. However, this project is aesthetically extremely pleasing to me. The idea of creating an artwork that guides those who experience it toward the experience of time on a long scale, "geologic time", as they put it, is fascinating, and I appreciate how it helps one step outside of the present reality of the influence of human alterations, and experience nature without the interference of elements that have been introduced on a short and local scale. This element of scale within the work is not only limited to the perception of time in a long scale, but space, as well, as the stars observed by those experiencing the artwork are so far away and the idea of a telescope is predicated upon drawing the distant into the close, allowing the experience of distances and sizes in space that could not be otherwise experienced through the use of light and its manipulation. The artist mentions a ..."primal relationship to light: We drink light." That sentence struck me within the commentary, as an interesting observation on the role of the visual in individuals' experience of the world, and its role in the existence of the work through the telescope bringing the distant closer. In a way, this aspect of scale within the work reminds me of landscapes from the Romantic-era Hudson River School of art, which had a recurring thematic element of highlighting the minimization of human elements within the context of the natural world. The astronomical scales explored by Roden Crater seem to continue and extend this theme, by eliminating the perception of the human element entirely: it seems that a significant element of this work is helping those who experience it experience the world around them separate of human influence. Another facet of this work that appeals greatly to me is the architecture of the created elements of the space. The architectural elements shown in the video seem to show, perhaps best exemplified with the discussion of the long, straight hallway and the ellipse within, the use of the exploration of geometric shapes as a motif within the architecture of the space. The simple geometricity of many of the patterns used within the architecture shown evokes, for me, the simple emergent patterns, such as the spheres of planets, the shapes of galaxies, and the shape of the crater within which the artwork is held, that appear in the nature that the work brings together with its audience. The penultimate element that I would like to discuss is the idea of the role of perception within the experience of the work. It seems to me that regardless of who is experiencing something or what they are experiencing, their history and their experiences will almost inevitably influence and shape the perception of their experience. Consequently, the idea of using this work to highlight the role of perception and one's surroundings in one's experiences seems like an avenue for some very interesting discussion and research. Finally, a related concept the artist brings up is the active role of the person experiencing the artwork in how the artwork is experienced: the artist refers to "your discovery" within the artwork. These discoveries I think play a substantial role, whether in the conscious or subconscious of the artist and audience, in the perception and shared cultural experience of artwork. In cultural discourse regarding artwork, even if it is not explicitly stated in so many words, it seems that the role people experiencing artworks play is both the individual and collective /exploration/ of the works. That is an idea that had not occurred to me before, so Turrell's explicit discussion of and bringing into the foreground this element of the way artwork is experienced and discussed piques my interest and is striking in how it highlights something that I have, I think, done subconsciously, or at least without naming, in my experience of the artworks I have experienced.
